docs/assignments_and_grading.md, before:

# Assignments & Grading

This course will make use of a variant of [Specification Grading](https://sites.temple.edu/hachadoorian/specification-grading/). This means that many assignments will be graded Complete/Incomplete or assigned a provisional grade, and in some cases will merely be returned with comments. Assignments marked Incomplete or not awarded full points may be revised and resubmitted. Quizzes can be retaken until passed, unless otherwise specified.

You will earn points along several **tracks**. Each track is worth up to 100 points. Your must progress along ***ALL*** tracks to be successful in this course. Your final grade is based on the ***lowest*** score earned along any track.

Tracks proceed linearly and assignments usually need to be completed in the designated order. For example, for labs, the material is cumulative, and you can't earn credit for Lab 4 if you haven't completed Lab 3. Often, later assignments in a track presume knowledge you will have acquired by completing earlier assignments.

Some assignments proceed in milestones. In each case, you must proceed along the milestones in order. For example, for a term project, there will often be an initial topic statement, followed by an annotated bibliography (for a paper) or analysis plan (for an analytical project), a draft, and a final report. You cannot submit an annotated bibliography if your topic statement has not been approved, and you cannot submit a draft or final report if you haven't submitted an annotated bibliography or analysis plan.

Grading will conform to the following scale:

* A 93%+
* A- 90 - <93%
* B+ 87 - <90%
* B 83 - <87%
* B- 80 - <83%
* C+ 77 - <80%
* C 73 - <77%
* C- 70 - <73%
* D+ 67 - <70%
* D 63 - <67%
* D- 60 - <63%
* F <60%

## Attendance

0-100 points. Your attendance score is a straight percentage of class sessions you are present for.

<!--For classes that meet once a week.-->

This course meets once a week. Missing *any* class meetings will hamper your ability to complete the work in this course. High-performing students tend to be the ones who attend all class meetings. Struggling students may be struggling for a variety of reasons, but for many of them, lack of attendance is a contributing factor. Your attendance percentage will also indicate the maximum final grade you can earn in this course. If you miss 3 classes, you have attended 78.6% of class meetings. Accordingly, your final grade will not be higher than a C+, *regardless of any other work completed*.

An exception is that missing one class (attending 92.9% of class meetings) will still earn an A in the Attendance Track.

## Lab Exercises

40 (base score) + 5 points for each of Labs 1 and 2 + 10 points for each of Labs 3 - 7. The labs are sequenced so that later labs rely upon concepts and skills learned in earlier labs. Accordingly, if any lab exercise is not submitted, no points will be awarded for any of the following exercises.

Lab exercises will be accepted late. However, if you turn your work in on time, you will be allowed to submit revisions after grading. Nothing is right the first time, and you should know that it is highly unlikely that you will be awarded full points for your first submission, especially for the more complex later exercises. Your goal should be to:

1. Submit your labs on time; and
2. Resubmit them until you get a perfect score.

To reiterate, late lab exercises may not be resubmitted for a higher grade.

### Lab 1-2 (5 points x two)

* Lab 1
* Lab 2

### Lab 3-7 (10 points x five)

* Lab 3
* Lab 4
* Lab 5
* Lab 6
* Lab 7

## Exams

30 (base score) + 10 points per completed content module. The exams will consist of 7 content modules, roughly corresponding to the material related to a given lab exercise.

You will earn 10 points for each completed content module. A score of 8 or higher will be rounded up to a 10. You will be allowed to retake a content module on a later exam. There will be two exams during the term. An optional "final" will have no new material, but will allow you to repeat earlier content modules for a higher grade.

## Term Project

**Undergraduate Students**

60 (base score) - 100 points.

This will be an independent analysis of somewhat higher comlexity than a lab exercise, using data and spatial methods determined by you. Points will be awarded for meeting milestones, including finding data, developing an analysis plan, etc.

**Graduate Students**

50 (base score) - 100 points.

This will be an empirical research paper including spatial analysis of an interesting empirical question. Points will be awarded for meeting milestones, including finding data, developing an analysis plan, etc.

For both undergraduate and graduate students, the final project should include the following:

* At least two datasets
* At least one attribute join
* At least one geoprocessing operation; examples include geocoding, spatial join, intersection, etc.
* At least two maps or data frames in the final layout
    * You could map different variables in different maps, or have one thematic map and an additional locator map or detail map
* An appropriate choice of projection

Note the "at leasts" above. Your project may well use more than two data sources and more than one geoprocessing operation. Final reports with *several* maps (many more than two) are not uncommon.

This course is primarily taught using ArcGIS Pro, but some students may find that they want to use additional software to complete their project. The final map layout can be produced entirely in ArcGIS or QGIS, or a basic map can be produced in the GIS software and the final layout can be completed in another software such as PowerPoint or Adobe Illustrator. Additional images can be produced in GeoDa, Google Earth, or other software, and incorporated into your final layout. Maps may be choropleth, proportional symbol, dot density, pin map, flow map, cartogram, etc, and you could combine different kinds of maps to display multiple variables (e.g. choropleth + proportional symbol).

The layout must include the following:

* Title
* Legend
* Scale bar (usually)
* Data sources
* Projection or geographic coordinate system
* Author's name and affiliation (i.e., your name and the college)
* Enough of a basemap to orient the reader; basemap elements could include political or adminstrative borders (e.g. states, counties), names of territories, major cities, major roads, or natural features

Depending on what maps you produce, you may need multiple legends or scale bars. Other elements, like data sources and author's name, may appear once for the entire layout.

Neatness counts. Make sure the map elements are visually balanced (See [Visual Hierarchy and Layout](https://gistbok.ucgis.org/bok-topics/visual-hierarchy-and-layout) from the GIS&T Body of Knowledge.) Use [http://colorbrewer2.org](http://colorbrewer2.org) to select colors.

### Milestone 1: Topic Proposal & Data (5 points)

This milestone will be evaluated in class, so that the instructor can give you immediate feedback. After the topic and data are approved, you can submit a summary to Canvas.

For this stage of the project, you should provide a topic of interest and identify data that you would like to use. The topic should not be too broad, but does not have to be a specifically formulated question. For example, something like "crime" is probably too broad, but you could say something like you want to look at the relationship between poverty and crime, or alcohol-serving establishments and crime, or housing abandonment and crime.

Additionally, you will not be able to complete your project without data, so identify data that you will use for this project. This could include a combination of both spatial and nonspatial data. For example, for a project on poverty and crime, you could use Census shapefiles of census tracts, and poverty information (also from the Census). Crime data might be individual crime incidents, or crimes aggregated by police agency or precinct. It may already be in a spatial format, or it could need to be georeferenced or geocoded.

For most students, the data will come from publicly available sources. You may not undertake a project that requires primary data collection. If you are already working with special purpose data, for example as an RA for another professor or for thesis research in your graduate program, you may conceive of a project that uses that data. But you must already have your hands on the data, not be in the process of collecting it.

You should make a basic map of your data with the layers you intend to use. If you find data that is nonspatial but has an ID field that can be matched to a spatial layer, you should do the join and map the joined layer. If it can be geocoded or spatialized (i.e. it has addresses or XY coordinates), talk to me about how you can map it.

### Milestone 2: Project Proposal (10 points)

Your final project will involve creating a map on a topic of your choice, based on data approved in the previous milestone. See the Final Project assignment for more details. You have already provided a topic statement. For the proposal, your document should include:

* Title
* A short abstract, including a general description of the problem or question you are going to address and a brief description of the background (why you chose this problem/question)
    * **Undergraduates:** The abstract should be about 100 words long
    * **Graduate students:** The abstract should be about 250 words long and include one or two references to previous research; for now, do not worry about the citation format
* Variables or factors you are going to consider, along with any candidate data sources you have identified (you need at least two)
* Spatial analysis functions you are going to use
    * Ex: "Use buffer and overlay operations to solve this site selection problem."
* Expected deliverables
    * Ex: "A choropleth map of percentage foreign-born population in Philadelphia overlayed with points representing locations of bias crime incidents."
    * Ex: "A map of SE New Jersey shore areas vulnerable to storm surge at different categories of hurricane magnitude."

### Milestone 3 (graduate only): Literature Review (10 points)

The literature review should uncover previous research in this area. Has this question been explored before? What were the results? What questions are left unanswered? It is OK if your project duplicates a previous study for a new area, or updates it in time.

The literature review should include at least four academic sources (journal articles or academic press books). You may also include media sources. The review should be narrative. Include your references section at the end. For citation style, use Chicago author-date.

### Milestone 4: Progress Report (10 points)

The progress report is a description of work completed so far and work remaining. You should include:

1. Data sets you are working with
2. A workflow diagram of operations completed or planned
3. A discussion, with reference to the workflow diagram, of steps completed so far
4. Anticipated results in relation to your topic of interest
5. At least one map of initial data or intermediate products in your analysis
6. Optionally, a discussion of challenges or problems encountered

The workflow diagram can be created using your word processor’s built-in drawing tools, as many word processors (MS Word, LibreOffice Writer, etc.) allow you to very easily create boxes, ellipses, and connecting lines/arrows. Or, you can do the workflow diagram in a separate software you are familiar with, and place the image in your report.

### Milestone 5: Final Report (15 points)

Your final report should follow the format of the lab reports. The Introduction should explain your research question, but compared with the lab reports, the Introduction should be significantly expanded.

For graduate students, the introduction should incorporate the literature review.

Your Data & Methods section should document your data sources and your process. What steps did you take and in what order? Do not include steps like "download data" or "unzip the archive". Also do not include the steps in creating the layout. Just focus on how you combine the data and any data manipulaton or geoprocessing steps you perform.

As the topic is open, there is not much in terms of general guidance I can provide, though I will be happy to answer questions in lab and via email.

Commit message:

Information about lab report format

docs/assignments_and_grading.md, after:

# Assignments & Grading

This course will make use of a variant of [Specification Grading](https://sites.temple.edu/hachadoorian/specification-grading/). This means that many assignments will be graded Complete/Incomplete or assigned a provisional grade, and in some cases will merely be returned with comments. Assignments marked Incomplete or not awarded full points may be revised and resubmitted. Quizzes can be retaken until passed, unless otherwise specified.

You will earn points along several **tracks**. Each track is worth up to 100 points. Your must progress along ***ALL*** tracks to be successful in this course. Your final grade is based on the ***lowest*** score earned along any track.

Tracks proceed linearly and assignments usually need to be completed in the designated order. For example, for labs, the material is cumulative, and you can't earn credit for Lab 4 if you haven't completed Lab 3. Often, later assignments in a track presume knowledge you will have acquired by completing earlier assignments.

Some assignments proceed in milestones. In each case, you must proceed along the milestones in order. For example, for a term project, there will often be an initial topic statement, followed by an annotated bibliography (for a paper) or analysis plan (for an analytical project), a draft, and a final report. You cannot submit an annotated bibliography if your topic statement has not been approved, and you cannot submit a draft or final report if you haven't submitted an annotated bibliography or analysis plan.

Grading will conform to the following scale:

* A 93%+
* A- 90 - <93%
* B+ 87 - <90%
* B 83 - <87%
* B- 80 - <83%
* C+ 77 - <80%
* C 73 - <77%
* C- 70 - <73%
* D+ 67 - <70%
* D 63 - <67%
* D- 60 - <63%
* F <60%

## Attendance

0-100 points. Your attendance score is a straight percentage of class sessions you are present for.

<!--For classes that meet once a week.-->

This course meets once a week. Missing *any* class meetings will hamper your ability to complete the work in this course. High-performing students tend to be the ones who attend all class meetings. Struggling students may be struggling for a variety of reasons, but for many of them, lack of attendance is a contributing factor. Your attendance percentage will also indicate the maximum final grade you can earn in this course. If you miss 3 classes, you have attended 78.6% of class meetings. Accordingly, your final grade will not be higher than a C+, *regardless of any other work completed*.

An exception is that missing one class (attending 92.9% of class meetings) will still earn an A in the Attendance Track.

## Lab Exercises

40 (base score) + 5 points for each of Labs 1 and 2 + 10 points for each of Labs 3 - 7. Labs 1 & 2 are focused on familiarizing yourself with the software. Lab 3 and later will be focused on an analysis task. The labs are sequenced so that later labs rely upon concepts and skills learned in earlier labs. Accordingly, if any lab exercise is not submitted, no points will be awarded for any of the following exercises.

For each lab assignment you should submit a brief PDF report via Canvas. I will grade and make comments on your report. **Exercises which are submitted on time, but don't earn full points, may be redone and resubmitted.** Your goal should be to earn full points for all lab exercises.

The lab report must be approximately 500-1000 words. The document should be single-spaced 12-14 point font. It should have your name, date, and lab assignment number (e.g. Lab 1) at the top of the page. Sloppy or unreadable labs will be sent back for revision.

The report must contain the following five sections:

1. Introduction
2. Methods
3. Results
4. Conclusion
5. Tables and Figures

Each section should be set off with a larger font. It will be easiest if you use built-in styles in your word processor to assign the "Heading 1" style to the section.
 
The introduction section should state the objective – what you are trying to accomplish in your assignment. Here, your objective is the goal of your analysis, not the learning objective. The introduction should not state that your objective is "To learn GIS" or something similar!
 
The methods section should state how you did the analysis, what analytical steps you took to complete the assignment.  This is not a tutorial and should not state buttons that you pushed. Rather, it should summarize what analytical operations you used. For this you should use the GIS jargon we learn in class, e.g. buffer, overlay, and the parameters employed.
 
The results section should report the results of your analysis. This section is often very brief, as it should be devoid of substantial commentary—just the facts. It could be just the numerical outcome of the analysis.
 
The conclusion section should offer some interpretation of your results as well as report on any assumptions and limitations of your analysis and what other steps could be taken to improve the analysis.
 
In addition, the lab may require the creation of maps, tables, and/or charts, as specified in the lab assignment. These graphics should appear in the final section of the report and referred to in the text.

### Lab 1-2 (5 points x two)

* Lab 1
* Lab 2

### Lab 3-7 (10 points x five)

* Lab 3
* Lab 4
* Lab 5
* Lab 6
* Lab 7

## Exams

30 (base score) + 10 points per completed content module. The exams will consist of 7 content modules, roughly corresponding to the material related to a given lab exercise.

You will earn 10 points for each completed content module. A score of 8 or higher will be rounded up to a 10. You will be allowed to retake a content module on a later exam. There will be two exams during the term. An optional "final" will have no new material, but will allow you to repeat earlier content modules for a higher grade.

## Term Project

**Undergraduate Students**

60 (base score) - 100 points.

This will be an independent analysis of somewhat higher comlexity than a lab exercise, using data and spatial methods determined by you. Points will be awarded for meeting milestones, including finding data, developing an analysis plan, etc.

**Graduate Students**

50 (base score) - 100 points.

This will be an empirical research paper including spatial analysis of an interesting empirical question. Points will be awarded for meeting milestones, including finding data, developing an analysis plan, etc.

For both undergraduate and graduate students, the final project should include the following:

* At least two datasets
* At least one attribute join
* At least one geoprocessing operation; examples include geocoding, spatial join, intersection, etc.
* At least two maps or data frames in the final layout
    * You could map different variables in different maps, or have one thematic map and an additional locator map or detail map
* An appropriate choice of projection

Note the "at leasts" above. Your project may well use more than two data sources and more than one geoprocessing operation. Final reports with *several* maps (many more than two) are not uncommon.

This course is primarily taught using ArcGIS Pro, but some students may find that they want to use additional software to complete their project. The final map layout can be produced entirely in ArcGIS or QGIS, or a basic map can be produced in the GIS software and the final layout can be completed in another software such as PowerPoint or Adobe Illustrator. Additional images can be produced in GeoDa, Google Earth, or other software, and incorporated into your final layout. Maps may be choropleth, proportional symbol, dot density, pin map, flow map, cartogram, etc, and you could combine different kinds of maps to display multiple variables (e.g. choropleth + proportional symbol).

The layout must include the following:

* Title
* Legend
* Scale bar (usually)
* Data sources
* Projection or geographic coordinate system
* Author's name and affiliation (i.e., your name and the college)
* Enough of a basemap to orient the reader; basemap elements could include political or adminstrative borders (e.g. states, counties), names of territories, major cities, major roads, or natural features

Depending on what maps you produce, you may need multiple legends or scale bars. Other elements, like data sources and author's name, may appear once for the entire layout.

Neatness counts. Make sure the map elements are visually balanced (See [Visual Hierarchy and Layout](https://gistbok.ucgis.org/bok-topics/visual-hierarchy-and-layout) from the GIS&T Body of Knowledge.) Use [http://colorbrewer2.org](http://colorbrewer2.org) to select colors.

### Milestone 1: Topic Proposal & Data (5 points)

This milestone will be evaluated in class, so that the instructor can give you immediate feedback. After the topic and data are approved, you can submit a summary to Canvas.

For this stage of the project, you should provide a topic of interest and identify data that you would like to use. The topic should not be too broad, but does not have to be a specifically formulated question. For example, something like "crime" is probably too broad, but you could say something like you want to look at the relationship between poverty and crime, or alcohol-serving establishments and crime, or housing abandonment and crime.

Additionally, you will not be able to complete your project without data, so identify data that you will use for this project. This could include a combination of both spatial and nonspatial data. For example, for a project on poverty and crime, you could use Census shapefiles of census tracts, and poverty information (also from the Census). Crime data might be individual crime incidents, or crimes aggregated by police agency or precinct. It may already be in a spatial format, or it could need to be georeferenced or geocoded.

For most students, the data will come from publicly available sources. You may not undertake a project that requires primary data collection. If you are already working with special purpose data, for example as an RA for another professor or for thesis research in your graduate program, you may conceive of a project that uses that data. But you must already have your hands on the data, not be in the process of collecting it.

You should make a basic map of your data with the layers you intend to use. If you find data that is nonspatial but has an ID field that can be matched to a spatial layer, you should do the join and map the joined layer. If it can be geocoded or spatialized (i.e. it has addresses or XY coordinates), talk to me about how you can map it.

### Milestone 2: Project Proposal (10 points)

Your final project will involve creating a map on a topic of your choice, based on data approved in the previous milestone. See the Final Project assignment for more details. You have already provided a topic statement. For the proposal, your document should include:

* Title
* A short abstract, including a general description of the problem or question you are going to address and a brief description of the background (why you chose this problem/question)
    * **Undergraduates:** The abstract should be about 100 words long
    * **Graduate students:** The abstract should be about 250 words long and include one or two references to previous research; for now, do not worry about the citation format
* Variables or factors you are going to consider, along with any candidate data sources you have identified (you need at least two)
* Spatial analysis functions you are going to use
    * Ex: "Use buffer and overlay operations to solve this site selection problem."
* Expected deliverables
    * Ex: "A choropleth map of percentage foreign-born population in Philadelphia overlayed with points representing locations of bias crime incidents."
    * Ex: "A map of SE New Jersey shore areas vulnerable to storm surge at different categories of hurricane magnitude."

### Milestone 3 (graduate only): Literature Review (10 points)

The literature review should uncover previous research in this area. Has this question been explored before? What were the results? What questions are left unanswered? It is OK if your project duplicates a previous study for a new area, or updates it in time.

The literature review should include at least four academic sources (journal articles or academic press books). You may also include media sources. The review should be narrative. Include your references section at the end. For citation style, use Chicago author-date.

### Milestone 4: Progress Report (10 points)

The progress report is a description of work completed so far and work remaining. You should include:

1. Data sets you are working with
2. A workflow diagram of operations completed or planned
3. A discussion, with reference to the workflow diagram, of steps completed so far
4. Anticipated results in relation to your topic of interest
5. At least one map of initial data or intermediate products in your analysis
6. Optionally, a discussion of challenges or problems encountered

The workflow diagram can be created using your word processor’s built-in drawing tools, as many word processors (MS Word, LibreOffice Writer, etc.) allow you to very easily create boxes, ellipses, and connecting lines/arrows. Or, you can do the workflow diagram in a separate software you are familiar with, and place the image in your report.

### Milestone 5: Final Report (15 points)

Your final report should follow the format of the lab reports. The Introduction should explain your research question, but compared with the lab reports, the Introduction should be significantly expanded.

For graduate students, the introduction should incorporate the literature review.

Your Data & Methods section should document your data sources and your process. What steps did you take and in what order? Do not include steps like "download data" or "unzip the archive". Also do not include the steps in creating the layout. Just focus on how you combine the data and any data manipulaton or geoprocessing steps you perform.

As the topic is open, there is not much in terms of general guidance I can provide, though I will be happy to answer questions in lab and via email.
